# Z-Banding-Caused-By-Extruder
## How to rectify Z Banding that is caused by the extruder
=======================================================

I feel like I am forever seeing people asking on how to fix Z Banding on their 3d Prints and forever seeing dozens of people listing reasons why but so many seem to overlook the fact that the extruder can be a primary or often a secondary reason for this Z banding.  Over and above that, this same issue can be the cause of poor top layer quality and strange or excessive tinkering with settings to get good results.  So I am going to attempt to give people a methodolgy to get things set correctly.

Your extruder could be the cause of Z banding issues either due to under or over extrusion, or the dreaded issue 6. 
Issue 6 affects direct drive extruders, with certain designs being more affected than others.  In relatively recent times, it has been discovered the eccentric or out of round gear sets can be the cause of inconsistant or pulsing extrusion, leading to things like Z banding and inconsistancy in the extrusion.  Traditionally in recent times, Direct Drive extruders are driven by a stepper motor with a small pinion gear on them, which drives a large spur gear which has typically had a filament drive gear physically coupled to it by way of a grub screw, and an idler gear driven by the coupled filament drive gear via teeth, with the filament being sprung clamped between those to filament drive gears forcing filament into the hotend.  

The problem with this design is that the coupling methodolgy of using a grub screw tends to leave the coupled filament drive gear out of round, so when it rotates, the pressure on the filament is inconsistant resulting in pulsing the pressure on the filament downwards.  One solution for this issue is using something along the lines of Bondtech's IDGA or RIDGA gear set which has the Spur gear and "coupled" filament drive gear as physically one piece physically part of the shaft ensuring the filament drive gear spins true and thus consistant pressure across the board.  This methodology does work, can be designed into a very small and lightweight package and I use this on most of my extruders.

The other physical change is to utilised a single drive gear with a bearing as the idler. For best results, you use a much larger drive gear that has more surface area to disapate the forces across and setting the preload on the bearing to keep pressure accordingly.  This is the design methodolgy that Galileo 2 utilises and I believe Bondtechs latest extruders use. This methodology also works and yeilds high torque levels however, prone to weighing more.

Overall, two great fixes for the issue at hand.  Option 3 is to utilise a remote extruder and bowden setup, which is the lightest way to do things, however is not a great solution if you like to print flexible filaments and can lead to inconsistancy if filament has room to move in the bowden itself, this is why the printers that utilise this design use bowden tubes like "capricorn" tube, which has very tight tolerances and constrains the filament path. This design can have issues with drag if everything is not clean and in tip top condition.

## Under or Over extrusion of the extruder
Regardless of your extruders design, setting the extruder up correctly is paramount and getting it dialed can have a big impact.  For starters, you need to get your e-steps as accurate as possible.  This is a machine specific setting and for best practice, follow Andrew Ellis' methodology for best results, like Andrew, I calibrate mine hot as it is less hassle. [Link to Andrew Ellis' method here](https://ellis3dp.com/Print-Tuning-Guide/articles/extruder_calibration.html)

The next step is to set  you Extrusion Multiplier in your slicer. Now this is a Per Filament Setting and different filaments will need different settings, unfortunately you can't set and forget this. Every filament behaves differently, sure standard ABS from company A may be the same as most of the colours in the range, but filaments that are lighter coloured but opaque will generally require a lower extrusion multiplier that its less opaque or darker counterpart, and this is because of what has been added to the fillament to achieve the colour and opaqueness. To add even more complexity to the equasion, your ABS might be mixed with PETG or PC or Carbon Fiber or Glass Fiber or tightanium oxide or aluminium flecs or a mirade of other stuff, and the size of those particles also make a massive difference and some filaments expand when you print them (this can also be caused by moisture in your filament so always keep your filament dry). The long and the short of this is extrusion multiplier should be checked and possibly adjusted with each new filament and you may need to create filament profiles for each type and brand of filament you use.  

My slicer now has about 8 different ABS profiles for different colours/brands, and another 4 for ASA, plus ones for PC CF, ABS CF, ASA CF, ABS GF.  They all behave slightly differently.  Extrusion Multiplier is where vear away from Andrew Ellis' guide. This is not because Andrew is wrong, I just happen to have a much quicker method that seems to work well for me.  I have an STL which will be available in this repository the produces a Cube and Pin.  Once you print this, the pin is to be place into a hole in the cube and the further it goes in, the closer you are to correct extrusion multiplier. There are also a series of lines on the pin, the wide lines represent 1 percent, the narrower ones between are 0.5 percent. If I can see that the there are 3 wide lines visible when I attempt to push the pin in to the whole, I will reduce my extrusion mulitplier by 3 percent and reslice and reprint it, and check again. When the pin is as near as damn flush with the top surface of the cube, you have your extrusion multiplier set correctly.  I encourage you to try this method, some people like it, some don't, your mileage may vary but I find it quick and easy. Andrew Ellis' methodology works as well, I just didn't find it as effective, found it more time consuming and more difficult to judge. 

Ultimately Andrew is widely viewed as the go to manual for print tuning but it never hurts to explore other methods, because thats how he came to his conclusions, and occasionally he will change things in his guide because he has found a better process or methodology.

One of the most amazing things about this 3D printing caper is all these wonderful people who share this info, and give others time helping them, not for money, but because they're nice good people and want to see 3D printing improve, so much of what is commercially available or off the shelf is based on the work of those that are tinkering and innovating in their home workshop and giving it away freely open source, the innovation isn't coming because a company is paying someone to innovate. So give those that are helping the community and innovating a pat on the back, buy them a coffee, maybe donate a few bucks to help them pay for the research, a few kind words cost you nothing and goes a long way!!
